# Test Scores and Socioeconomic Status Analysis
This is what my repository is

## Introduction
The topic I am exploring is the correlation between students’ average test scores and socioeconomic status. As a senior in high school, test scores are a personally relevant topic in the college application process and performance within the classroom. In my experience, I have observed a wide range of resources that students utilize, such as private tutoring and advanced prep classes, which are closely related to economic status and thus performance within the classroom. Students and families with less disposable income will often have less access to prestigious and expensive resources, which can result in the student falling behind in testing. The questions I aimed to answer through analysis of data and files using Java were as follows: What is the relationship between economic status and students’ average test scores? Is there a correlation between students’ average test scores and whether they attend school in urban or rural districts?

## Methods
a) This data was provided by the Education Opportunity Project at Stanford University. The Stanford Education Data Archive (SEDA), which heads this project, includes a wide range of educational conditions and outcomes in school districts and countries across the United States. This data was collected by university level researchers, PHD Students, and professors, all who were looking to analyze trends in academic performance. This database is the first national database of academic performance, and can be analyzed using various combinations of classification. SEDA makes this data readily available on their website for usage; in order to use this data in my project, I had to accept the terms of a Data Use Agreement form with my email address. Additionally, SEDA provides instructions on how to download this data for non-commercial purposes, making my project a viable reason to analyze this data.
b) In order to answer my first question, which looked at the correlation between students’ average test scores and economic status, I had to read in data from two published files: test score means pooled by school, and covariate data pooled by school as well. I used the documentation on SEDA’s website to identify the data I needed, which were the proportion of students eligible for free or reduced price lunch and the school mean achievement in test scores. I inferred that a higher proportion of students eligible for free or reduced price lunch would be an indicator of lower economic status. The mean achievement in test scores were compared against a national average of 0.0, therefore, negative values indicated a below average performance and positive values indicated an above average performance. In order to draw conclusions from these two sets of numbers, I divided the test scores into those below average and those above average, and then averaged the proportions of students eligible for free or reduced price lunch within those two categories. To answer my second question, which looked at the relationship between attending school (and reasonably, living) in an urban vs. rural area and average achievement in test scores. Similar to my first question, I read data from the same two files and instead looked at level of urbanization instead of economic status. There were various indicators of urbanization such as “City”, “Rural”, “Suburban”, “Town”, etc., but I chose to look at the two ends of the spectrum, namely comparing “City” and “Rural” schools. I selected the schools with these two labels, and divided them into two separate categories to average the test scores of both categories individually.
c) Initially, most of the challenges I ran into were related to statistical procedure and analysis. I began working to answer my first question by cutting down the number of schools in my two files to approximately six schools, so that I had far fewer data points to debug as I built the basis of my code. However, from here, I struggled to find the best way to analyze data to end up with statistically significant results. I brainstormed many ideas and I settled on the procedure outlined above, firstly testing this on my small number of data points. Another issue I ran into was after I reinstated the entire set of data back into my file, meaning that I was working with thousands of arguably imperfect data. I ran into index out of bounds errors as a result of some schools lacking values in certain columns. I had to account for this by checking to see if there were an adequate number of values in a given line by using if statements. Eventually, after several rounds of trial and error I was able to arrive at a finished result.

## Results and Conclusion
a) In my first question, that data was as follows. For students who performed below the national test average, the proportion of students who qualified for free or reduced price lunch was 55.512%. For students who performed above the national test average, the proportion of students who qualified for free or reduced price lunch was 55.655%. I was initially surprised by this data, as I hypothesized that there would be a more apparent contrast between the two proportions. While I had assumed that students who performed less than average would generally have a lower economic status, my data analysis revealed proportions that were almost the same to tenths of a percent. In considering possible extraneous factors that affected my procedure, I considered that there may have been extreme outliers which skewed the data. It is likely that this data was not normally distributed, therefore it is harder to draw conclusions with the approach that I took. Therefore, while my data reveals that there is virtually no correlation between mean test scores and economic status, further analysis of this data with more approaches would likely reveal different results. In my second question, the data was as follows. For students who lived in rural regions, they performed on average -0.0312 below the national average. For students who lived in urban regions, they performed on average -0.0502 below the national average. Once again, this data was surprising. I hypothesized that students in rural regions would on average score lower on tests while students in urban regions would score higher on average, yet this data revealed the opposite. The extraneous factors from above are applicable here, such as outliers. Additionally, it would be important to also consider the different categories of urbanization between purely urban and purely rural regions, as this data would likely reveal more about students’ performance. Further analysis of this data would be needed in order to draw accurate conclusions about the impact of urbanization or lack thereof on students’ test scores, as it is possible that my specific data set was skewed.
b) In answering my first question, it would be useful to take a closer look at the top 10% of test scorers and the bottom 10% of test scores and compare the economic status of these two categories. Dividing simply by positive and negative achievement may have resulted in accurate data, and looking at these more refined categories would be intriguing. Additionally, exploring how race intersects with these categories of economic status, urbanization, and students’ performance would be fascinating to explore. There are readily available datasets provided by SEDA that give the proportion of students of a certain race in the given schools, so this is an additional question that is certainly answerable using given data. Overall, while my data revealed surprising results that counteracted by hypotheses, this project provided great insight into the various factors that influence students' achievements.
